README.md, before:

# Moon Information API

An Azure Function API that provides detailed information about the Moon's position, phase, and timing of astronomical events. Built using Python and the `ephem` library.

## Features

- Current moon phase (percentage illuminated)
- Next new moon and full moon dates
- Moon's current position (altitude and azimuth in both degrees and radians)
- Distance from Earth in kilometers
- Current constellation
- Moon rise and set times (when location provided)
- Location-specific calculations

## Prerequisites

- Python 3.10 or higher
- Azure Functions Core Tools
- Python Azure Functions dependencies

## Installation

1. Clone the repository:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/c-rw/Moon.git
cd moon
```

2. Create and activate a virtual environment:

```bash
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate  # On Windows use: .venv\Scripts\activate
```

3. Install dependencies:

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Usage

### Starting the API Locally

Run the API locally using Azure Functions Core Tools:

```bash
func start
```

The API will be available at `http://localhost:7071/api/moon`

### API Endpoints

#### Basic Moon Information (GET)

```bash
curl http://localhost:7071/api/moon
```

#### Location-Specific Moon Information (POST)

```bash
curl -X POST \
  http://localhost:7071/api/moon \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"latitude": 35.7478, "longitude": -95.3697}'
```

Note: Latitude must be between -90 and 90, longitude between -180 and 180.

### Example Responses

#### Basic Response (Without Location)

```json
{
  "current_phase": 82.61,
  "next_phases": [
    {
      "phase": "New Moon",
      "date": "2025-01-29 12:35:54 UTC"
    },
    {
      "phase": "Full Moon",
      "date": "2025-02-12 13:53:19 UTC"
    }
  ],
  "altitude": {
    "degrees": -6.97,
    "radians": "-0:06:57.6"
  },
  "azimuth": {
    "degrees": 78.30,
    "radians": "78:18:12.0"
  },
  "distance": "399337 km",
  "constellation": "Leo",
  "timestamp": "2025-01-18 02:59:09 UTC"
}
```

#### Response with Location Data

```json
{
  "current_phase": 82.61,
  "next_phases": [
    {
      "phase": "New Moon",
      "date": "2025-01-29 12:35:54 UTC"
    },
    {
      "phase": "Full Moon",
      "date": "2025-02-12 13:53:19 UTC"
    }
  ],
  "altitude": {
    "degrees": -6.97,
    "radians": "-0:06:57.6"
  },
  "azimuth": {
    "degrees": 78.30,
    "radians": "78:18:12.0"
  },
  "distance": "399337 km",
  "constellation": "Leo",
  "moonrise_and_set": {
    "next_moonrise": "2025-01-18 13:45:23 UTC",
    "next_moonset": "2025-01-19 02:12:45 UTC"
  },
  "observer": {
    "latitude": 35.7478,
    "longitude": -95.3697
  },
  "timestamp": "2025-01-18 02:59:09 UTC"
}
```

#### Error Response Example

```json
{
  "error": "Invalid latitude or longitude values. Latitude must be between -90 and 90, longitude between -180 and 180."
}
```

## Response Fields

- `current_phase`: Percentage of the moon's visible disk that is illuminated (0-100)
- `next_phases`: Upcoming new moon and full moon dates
- `altitude`: Angular height above the horizon (negative values mean below horizon)
  - `degrees`: Altitude in decimal degrees
  - `radians`: Altitude in radians (traditional astronomy format)
- `azimuth`: Direction along the horizon (0° = North, 90° = East, etc.)
  - `degrees`: Azimuth in decimal degrees
  - `radians`: Azimuth in radians (traditional astronomy format)
- `distance`: Distance from Earth in kilometers
- `constellation`: Current constellation the moon is in
- `timestamp`: UTC timestamp of the observation
- `moonrise_and_set`: Next moonrise and moonset times (only included when location provided)
- `observer`: Location coordinates (only included when location provided)
  - `latitude`: Observer's latitude
  - `longitude`: Observer's longitude

## Error Handling

The API includes validation for:

- Valid JSON input
- Latitude and longitude format (must be valid numbers)
- Latitude and longitude ranges (latitude: -90 to 90, longitude: -180 to 180)

## Deployment

To deploy to Azure:

1. Create an Azure Function App in your Azure portal

2. Deploy using Azure Functions Core Tools:

```bash
func azure functionapp publish <your-function-app-name>
```

## License

MIT License

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit a Pull Request.

Commit message:

Update README to reflect the use of Skyfield and Astropy libraries, enhance error response examples, and add implementation details

README.md, after:

# Moon Information API

An Azure Function API that provides detailed information about the Moon's position, phase, and timing of astronomical events. Built using Python with the `ephem`, `skyfield`, and `astropy` libraries.

## Features

- Current moon phase (percentage illuminated)
- Next new moon and full moon dates
- Moon's current position (altitude and azimuth in both degrees and radians)
- Distance from Earth in kilometers
- Current constellation
- Moon rise and set times (when location provided)
- Location-specific calculations

## Prerequisites

- Python 3.10 or higher
- Azure Functions Core Tools
- Python Azure Functions dependencies

## Installation

1. Clone the repository:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/c-rw/Moon.git
cd moon
```

2. Create and activate a virtual environment:

```bash
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate  # On Windows use: .venv\Scripts\activate
```

3. Install dependencies:

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Usage

### Starting the API Locally

Run the API locally using Azure Functions Core Tools:

```bash
func start
```

The API will be available at `http://localhost:7071/api/moon`

### API Endpoints

#### Basic Moon Information (GET)

```bash
curl http://localhost:7071/api/moon
```

#### Location-Specific Moon Information (POST)

```bash
curl -X POST \
  http://localhost:7071/api/moon \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"latitude": 35.7478, "longitude": -95.3697}'
```

Note: Latitude must be between -90 and 90, longitude between -180 and 180.

### Example Responses

#### Basic Response (Without Location)

```json
{
  "current_phase": 82.61,
  "next_phases": [
    {
      "phase": "New Moon",
      "date": "2025-01-29 12:35:54 UTC"
    },
    {
      "phase": "Full Moon",
      "date": "2025-02-12 13:53:19 UTC"
    }
  ],
  "altitude": {
    "degrees": -6.97,
    "radians": "-0:06:57.6"
  },
  "azimuth": {
    "degrees": 78.30,
    "radians": "78:18:12.0"
  },
  "distance": "399337 km",
  "constellation": "Leo",
  "timestamp": "2025-01-18 02:59:09 UTC"
}
```

#### Response with Location Data

```json
{
  "current_phase": 82.61,
  "next_phases": [
    {
      "phase": "New Moon",
      "date": "2025-01-29 12:35:54 UTC"
    },
    {
      "phase": "Full Moon",
      "date": "2025-02-12 13:53:19 UTC"
    }
  ],
  "altitude": {
    "degrees": -6.97,
    "radians": "-0:06:57.6"
  },
  "azimuth": {
    "degrees": 78.30,
    "radians": "78:18:12.0"
  },
  "distance": "399337 km",
  "constellation": "Leo",
  "moonrise_and_set": {
    "next_moonrise": "2025-01-18 13:45:23 UTC",
    "next_moonset": "2025-01-19 02:12:45 UTC"
  },
  "observer": {
    "latitude": 35.7478,
    "longitude": -95.3697
  },
  "timestamp": "2025-01-18 02:59:09 UTC"
}
```

#### Error Response Examples

```json
{
  "error": "Invalid latitude or longitude values. Latitude must be between -90 and 90, longitude between -180 and 180."
}
```

```json
{
  "error": "Latitude and longitude are required in POST requests"
}
```

```json
{
  "error": "Invalid JSON in request body"
}
```

## Response Fields

- `current_phase`: Percentage of the moon's visible disk that is illuminated (0-100)
- `next_phases`: Upcoming new moon and full moon dates
- `altitude`: Angular height above the horizon (negative values mean below horizon)
  - `degrees`: Altitude in decimal degrees
  - `radians`: Altitude in radians (traditional astronomy format)
- `azimuth`: Direction along the horizon (0° = North, 90° = East, etc.)
  - `degrees`: Azimuth in decimal degrees
  - `radians`: Azimuth in radians (traditional astronomy format)
- `distance`: Distance from Earth in kilometers
- `constellation`: Current constellation the moon is in
- `timestamp`: UTC timestamp of the observation
- `moonrise_and_set`: Next moonrise and moonset times (only included when location provided)
- `observer`: Location coordinates (only included when location provided)
  - `latitude`: Observer's latitude
  - `longitude`: Observer's longitude

## Error Handling

The API includes validation for:

- Valid JSON input
- Latitude and longitude format (must be valid numbers)
- Latitude and longitude ranges (latitude: -90 to 90, longitude: -180 to 180)

## Implementation Details

The API uses three primary libraries for astronomical calculations:

- `ephem`: For basic planetary calculations, moon phase, and rise/set times
- `skyfield`: For precise astronomical positioning
- `astropy`: For constellation determination and coordinate handling

## Deployment

To deploy to Azure:

1. Create an Azure Function App in your Azure portal

2. Deploy using Azure Functions Core Tools:

```bash
func azure functionapp publish <your-function-app-name>
```

## License

MIT License

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit a Pull Request.
